5 habits to have better finances than 99% of people
How to end up richer than your peers, on the long game

Finances are the only topic of conversation that never gets old. Everyone is always interested in making and managing money. And they always will!

It’s in our nature! Providing, being abundant.

There’s a reason our species was pre-historically called “hunter gatherers”. It’s because we like to gather, to collect, to have! It offers us security, safety and status.

And we all know how much we starve for those.

Most people are financially illiterate
While this is one topic that never gets old and is always of utmost importance to people, it’s not directly thought in schools, which ultimately creates generations that are unprepared and inefficient when it comes to their finances.

The system creates literate people, who are financially illiterate.

How to get richer than 99% of your peers
There are a lot of procedures to describe and a lot of techniques that financial advisors recommend.

You can also probably find books, articles and other blog posts about this, enough to last you for years of reading.

However, there are 2 problems with the financial advice these days:

it’s harder to navigate through the commission savvy advisors and employees that just want to convince you in the direction that’s profitable for them
- The general good advice is generally explained in an overly complex manner, too complicated for the average Joe or the old-school, cash holding relatives
First of all, I would like to clarify that I am not a financial advisor, nor I’ve ever been. I am a Software Engineer that wanted to improve his finances.

Next, I’ll break down what a few hundred articles, hours of YouTube videos and few books made me realize. And I’ll do my best to explain it in a way that’s easily understandable for everyone, like I wanted it when researching.

The 5 tips to improve your finances
Practice mindful spending
The first thing everyone should do with their finances is to start being aware of the flow of money into their lives.

Don’t panic and start cutting out your coffees, or lock yourself in your house for a week to reduce spending.

Try to have a normal week, maybe even go a bit extra, have that coffee if you want, get the croissant you were craving, order in on Friday night.

Don’t exaggerate, but don’t hold back either!

You want to see how much you are spending on average in a week, but also to live comfortably, whatever that means for you.

For some it might mean a non-disputable massage every Sunday, or a non-debatable Squash game, or an every day artisan coffee at your favorite café.

We still want you to be happy, that’s the ultimate goal.

Now, break down what you spent your money on, and see how you are doing.

Most of the bank applications have a way of describing your spending into multiple categories.

Practice strategic spending
Once you identified how much a normal week costs and what you spend your money on, let’s address some of those behaviours.

Getting yourself into debt or spending too much money is sometimes not your fault.

It can be a medical emergency, a family situation or any other unplanned situation. There are terrible events and losses people go through and nobody should be judged in those situations, not even by themselves.

For most people though, getting into debt and poor financial management can be attributed to:

Lack or patience
Poor relationship with money
Impulsive buying
I’ll give you some examples:

I don’t need a new phone now but my friend got the new one and I can’t be the one with an older version
I’ve been on a city break already and I don’t have the budget for another one but some friends are going and I don’t want to miss it – Fear of Missing Out
I really like the BMW 3 Series and I have the budget for it, but I also like the 4 Series, which is out of my budget. But we only live once, I’ll get that.
I finished my clothes spending budget this month, but I really like that shirt. I’ll get it. I deserve to treat myself.
These are some of a lot of examples.

As you can see, we tend to use the money and disregard our budgets, when feeling down or when looking after quick and instant gratification, to fix a bad feeling.

Now, what I call strategic spending helped me deal with this, and have a different outlook. It is basically doing or getting the thing, but planned accordingly.

For example:

I don’t need a new phone and don’t have the budget now. But I really want it. I will analyse the budget and see when my spending will reduce and when I’ll have the capacity to buy it effortlessly. In 3 months. Is mine broken and I need it next month? Ok, what spending from next month can I postpone, to make room for the phone.
- My friends are going to a city break but I just came back and don’t have the budget. Do I really want to go or I just have FOMO? If I really want to go, than same, can I change some future spending to accomodate it? If not, maybe you should’t go.
- I like and have the budget for the 3 Series but I love the 4 series. Good! You have a goal to work towards! If you get into debt and suffer, you might not have the budget too soon for the 5 Series if you’ll like that next. Get the 3, be comfortable, save some more and when you are comfortable for the 4 Series. There’s always going to be a car that you like that’s out of your budget. Take it gradually.
- You really like that shirt! Great! Is it reduced? Because it not, than chances are you can still find it next month. If it’s reduced that you might be able to go ahead, but reduce your clothing budget next month.
We are impulsive beings controlled by emotions.

Take the emotions out of it for a second and find a solution.

One of these methods should work:

Postpone the spending if possible
- debate it’s importance
- understand the underlying feeling
- stop being impulsive
- spend it gradually
- Split the payment
- Reduce the spending budget for next month
- Reduce the spending this month if you know you will spend more next month
Pay off your debts first
If you already have debt, don’t worry, so does most of the population.

Whether it’s student debt, a mortgage, car payment, an actual loan or a credit card, debt is the same.

First of all, we need to remove the stigma about debt. It’s not a villain. It’s the key element of growth and development.

It might take you 10 years to save the money to start a new business. But if you take a loan, in 10 years you might already have a successfull business and would have paid the load back.

Apple, Amazon or Netflix all work on debt. Apple recently funded an investment of 90 billion using debt, although they have profit reserves of over 300 billion sitting around. Why not used those? Because you might need it fast and quick later.

My parents thought be young, in a country where everyone hated and avoided debt, to embrace it strategically and use it mindfully, so I don’t block my own money.

However, there is a certain level of debt you should get to.

My rule is this:

Check how much can you safely save in a year without being frugal. Take 70% of that at most. That’s how much you can pay in debt for that year.

So if I can save 30k this year, I’ll be able to pay around 20k in debt this year at most. That means around 1.6k a month.

Now you can use online calculators, decide how many years are you willing to pay and that’s how much you can effortlessly borrow.

If you already borrowed, or have debts already, focus on why I said to also have an extra 30% at least in savings.

You will use these to not get into more debt, or to pay more towards your monthy payment, choosing to either reduce the monthly payment of your debt or its length.

Whenever you can, pay a bit more and I would recommend reducing the period.

Organise your accounts
Always get the best deal on your accounts.

You should always research all these elements before opening an account:

the bank
- The account types
- The taxes
- The savings APR% (if debit)
- The payback APR% (if credit)
For the credit card, you’ll want these features:

APR as low as possible
- Longer payback period without applying any APR
- Benefits and Points
For the debit account, you’ll want these features:

No overdraft fees or very low
Decent overdraft amount
No ATM costs
Benefits
No account fees
For both accounts, you’ll want to do these:

Call to waive a late fee for a credit card immediately (might not be sent to the credit score)
Call to increase your savings APR (if debit) if you are a longtime client
Call to decrease your credit card APR if you are a longtime client
Invest
Once you know what you spend on, strategically plan it so that you can still continue saving and pay off your debts correctly, you are ready to invest.

Don’t jump into investing, send your money there this month, and then go into debt next month or stop saving then.

You should always invest an amount that does not mean you will sacrifice or go into debt.

However, when you are comfortable enough to invest, you should do it.

There are hundreds of options but I will tell you what I plan to do, although I can’t guarantee any results or that it is good at all.

Save at least 30% of my income (that’s because my living expenses are considerably lower than my income)
Choose an investment budget out of those saved money. I usually go for no more than 50% of the saved ones.
50% goes into a long-term ISA
25% into certain stocks and ETFs that I consider huge potential
25% into Crypto ( I know this is controversial but to each their own ) it can also be wines, whisky or towards a Berkin bag
In conclusion, I hope this will help improve your performance.

Like the title specifies, most of the people don’t follow these rules, and their finances are in a tough spot.

This happens to people from any background, with any kind of education and any kind of income.

So follow me for more and beware!



What to Do When You’re Completely Broke
Your gut sinks with that sinking feeling that wakes you up in the middle of the night. You’re completely and utterly broke.

Everybody experiences bad luck from time to time — job loss, unexpected bills, or just plain bad luck. You are not the only one, though. Ninety-two percent of your fellow Americans agree with you. What’s more, it is estimated that less than half (45%) of Americans can comfortably live on their current income.

Whatever the reason, being broke is stressful and challenging. More importantly, there are steps you can take to help yourself through this difficult time.

That said, this post’s purpose isn’t to sugarcoat the situation. There is nothing worse than being broke. Stress, embarrassment, and a sense of helplessness can accompany it. But it’s important to remember that this is only a temporary setback. Moreover, a clear plan combined with resourcefulness and resilience can help you recover.

1. Breathe and be honest.
First of all, don’t panic. Yes, there’s nothing more nerve-wracking than realizing you’re broke. But, again, many of us have been there. Occasionally, even the most frugal people face financial hardships.

Instead, acknowledge your situation. You don’t need to beat yourself up or bury your head in the sand. Embrace reality by taking a deep breath. The first step to finding a solution is to face the problem head-on.

Furthermore, you should remind yourself that your financial situation isn’t a reflection of yourself and that you can cope with it. Tell yourself that your resilience has seen you through far worse, so you’re confident you’ll also get through this.

2. Diagnose the problem.
In many cases, becoming broke is caused by two factors.

Firstly, you may not be earning enough money. Often, this occurs suddenly after losing a job, getting sick, or being injured. Or, in some cases, you’re underpaid or unable to work as much as you would like.

Secondly, you may be overspending. Usually, this occurs more slowly. As an example, you charge a few things to make ends meet. As a result, you have to charge more next month since you have to pay your credit card bill for last month’s expenses with this month’s money. As a result, the situation slowly spirals out of control. Even if you are working, you end up broke.

It is also possible that these two factors are contributing to your financial hardship, for instance. An income reduction can occur when you spend more than you can afford. If you weren’t overspending, you might have been able to handle the reduction in income.

3. Don’t point fingers.
I love this quote; “There is no point in pointing fingers because three fingers are pointing back at you!”

In other words, it’s easier to blame others or specific events for your financial woes. Maybe you had to quit your job because you clashed with your boss. I may have been fired because I couldn’t get to work. After all, some idiot ran into my car. Or, I just couldn’t pass up on that new iPhone with all its excellent features.

This may sound harsh. Ultimately, your money is your responsibility, so if you are broke, you must also deal with that. Even though life has dealt you a lousy hand, only you have the power to pull yourself out of a rut.

To make changes in your life, you must understand and accept that you are responsible for your present situation. When you blame others for your predicament, you prevent yourself from taking responsibility for your situation and making necessary changes.

4. Develop a game plan.
Let’s say you’re coaching your son’s losing little league team. Are you telling these kids that they’re terrible? No way. By identifying weak points and practicing, you can improve. Guess what? Your winning streak begins.

You’ll approach your finances precisely that way. To get started, you might want to do the following:

Gather your financial statements. Collect your income, expenses, and debt statements to understand your finances.
Categorize your expenses. List your essential and non-essential expenses (rent, utilities, food) expenses. Is there anywhere you can cut back?
Calculate your runway. With your current resources, determine how long you can last. This will help you prioritize your actions.
Basically, you want to track how much money you bring in and where it all goes. After that, figure out how much more you will need to make to cover the expenses for at least the next 1–2 months.

Once you get a better grasp on your finances, try out different budgeting methods. Choose the one you like best to get your finances back on track.

5. Redefine your necessities.
Many things in your life will need to change to survive being broke during this time. Particularly — necessities should no longer be necessities.

What does that mean? What’s essential when you have enough money to pay all your bills is oftenn’t necessary when you are broke. This will prevent you from constantly asking yourself, “Why am I always broke?”

Put another way, it’s the familiar conversation about needs versus wants. After all, you probably don’t consider your needs the same now as when you got your first job and moved out of your parent’s home. Our needs become more significant as we earn more, and our wants become fewer.

Ultimately, tough times require you to decrease your needs and increase your wants.

Therefore, if you’re broke, you’ll have to put a freeze on your wants and focus on what’s essential.

Honestly, you don’t need much. A person needs food, warmth, and shelter at a minimum.

Taking necessities to the extreme:

It is possible to eat rice and beans as a basic meal. You can handle this.
Four layers of clothing could provide warmth.
You could find shelter in a shared house or rent a room.
When you buy fewer necessities, you need less money to pay for them. This is one of the most productive things you can — do when you have no money.

6. Make a radical change.
For me, being in debt is very different from being broke.

When you’re in debt, you’re paying interest on the debt, and you’ve spent more money than you make. You are still paying your debts and trying to make ends meet.

Alternatively, being completely broke means you have exhausted your options and cannot take on new debt. You can’t buy groceries or pay your bills right now because you don’t have enough money. At this point, you should get radical and ignore everything else.

If you just lost your job and are drowning under a large mortgage, it might be time to sell your house or bring in a roommate. After all, cutting cable might save you a few dollars each month, but it won’t make or break your finances.

The bottom line is that you need to consider every aspect of your life. That might mean making drastic changes until your head is above water.

7. Face your debts head-on.
You won’t be able to magically get rid of debt by ignoring it. As such, don’t hesitate to contact your creditors and explain the situation.

In the case of student loans, you may be able to apply for forbearance, deferment, or income-based repayment options. The payments can be drastically lowered or even paused altogether if you choose to use these options. Or, contact your lender if you are having trouble keeping up with your credit cards, personal loans, or auto loans.

In short, you may want to consider consolidation programs, hardship programs, and repayment plans. But if that’s not possible if you don’t have an open line of communication with your creditors.

8. Take advantage of public assistance and free opportunities.
There are many public assistance benefits you could take advantage of, especially SNAP (commonly called “food stamps”), the TANF program (Temporary Assistance for Needy Families), and Medicaid. Using them is also not something to be ashamed of.

There are even funds for home heating and cooling in some circumstances. In cases where your electricity or gas is in danger of being shut off, these can be lifesaving public assistance programs.

Additionally, don’t hesitate to contact local charities, social service agencies, or religious organizations if you need help with food, utility bills, or temporary housing. The 211 phone number, for example, provides access to local community services. Multiple languages are available for 211, so people in need can get information about physical and mental health resources, housing, utilities, food, and employment, as well as crisis interventions and suicide prevention.

Furthermore, many free resources are available. Public libraries offer free Wi-Fi connections, computers, and educational materials. You can also take online courses and workshops on everything from boosting your earning potential to exercising for free.

9. Ask for help
In order to love yourself through tough times, you need to allow yourself to be loved.

Don’t be afraid to ask for help from family and friends, and be willing to be vulnerable. Perhaps they’ve been where you are now, and you’d be surprised how readily they’re willing to help out.

If you’re uncomfortable asking for money directly, try getting a loan and paying them back over time. It’s also okay to ask for non-monetary help, such as coming over for a home-cooked meal or asking if they have extra pantry items.

You could also organize a carpool with colleagues to reduce your commute time and allow you to pick up another shift after school. In the end, you don’t have to do everything yourself.

10. Hustle and look for income-producing opportunities.
You don’t have to stop moving forward just because you’re broke. Find ways to make extra money, such as:

Freelance work. You can sell your skills on platforms like Upwork or Fiverr.
Gig economy. You can drive for rideshare companies, deliver food, or complete online tasks.
Sell unused items. You can turn unwanted items into cash by selling them online or having garage sales.
Odd jobs. Provide services such as dog walking, house cleaning, and tutoring when available.
11. Focus on your mental wellbeing.
The effects of financial hardship can have a negative impact on your mental health. Invest time in self-care activities like meditation, exercise, and spending time with family and friends. If anxiety or depression are affecting you, you may want to consider seeking professional help.

Remember that maintaining a healthy mental state is just as important as maintaining a healthy financial state.

12. Celebrate small victories.
It takes time for progress to occur. Whether it’s paying off small debts or sticking to your budget for a week, celebrate even the smallest wins. Whatever the size of the victory, it is a step in the right direction towards your financial goals.

Keeping motivated is key to success. As such, recognize your progress and continue to march forward.

13. Build a safety net.
When you return, put an emergency fund at the top of your priority list. To prepare for future unforeseen events, try saving at least three to six months of living expenses.

Maintaining a safety net can keep you from falling back into financial hardship and provide peace of mind.

14. Focus on long-term solutions.
In addition to taking immediate action, remember to keep the long-term in mind. To improve your employability, consider upskilling or enrolling in a job training program if job instability is the underlying cause.

If possible, consider educational opportunities to enhance your qualifications and help you gain access to higher-paying jobs. In the future, you will be glad you invested in yourself.

15. Learn from the experience.
There is a lot to learn from this challenging experience. Identify areas where your financial literacy can be improved by understanding what led to your financial situation. To start, learn about budgeting, saving, and debt management.

As a result of this knowledge, you will be able to make informed financial decisions in the future.

FAQs
What if I’m in debt?
It is possible to manage and repay debt with the help of many resources. Getting in touch with a non-profit debt relief organization or a credit counselor may be a good place to start.

How can I improve my financial literacy?
You can find many resources online to help you better understand personal finance. Books, articles, and online courses cover topics such as budgeting, saving, and investing.

What if I feel hopeless?
Please keep in mind that this is a temporary situation. Despite the challenges, there is hope for the future. If you’re feeling overwhelmed, you may benefit from talking to a therapist. They can offer support and guidance during this difficult time.

How do I stay motivated when things are tough?
Don’t be afraid to celebrate small wins. Despite small changes, they can have a significant impact over time.


Nickel and Dimed 20 Years Later — Why Americans Still Aren’t Getting By

Have you ever wondered what it’s like to experience life as a working class American, barely getting by on minimum wage? This was an assignment the late journalist Barbara Ehrenreich took up in the late 1990s. Her work culminated in the book Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in America.

To learn about the plight of the working poor, Ehrenreich gave up the luxuries of her middle class existence to experience life as an American trying to get by on a low-wage job. She took work in Key West, Florida, Portland, Maine, and Minneapolis, Minnesota. In each city, she had to subsist on whatever her income could afford. That often meant living in pay-by-the-week motels and eating highly processed food.

Finding work was a job in and of itself. She eventually found work as a waitress, a maid, a nursing home assistant, and an associate at Wal-Mart. Her research only came to an end when she was unable to secure housing in Minneapolis. As she astutely noted in the book:

“For each day that I fail to find cheaper quarters…I am spending $49.95 for the privilege of putting clothes away at Wal-Mart.” (185)

Even though Nickel and Dimed was written more than two decades ago, it reads as if it’s a present-day reflection on the state of work. A footnote on page 16 highlights that the wage for tipped employees back then was $2.13. In 2024, that wage has remained unchanged.

Ehrenreich’s lived experience shows that while wages were certainly an issue back then, it wasn’t just the paltry wages — it was the relationship between wages and housing. As Ehrenreich writes:

“When the rich and the poor compete for housing on the open market, the poor don’t stand a chance.” (202)

In the two decades since Ehrenreich published Nickel and Dimed, nothing has changed. In fact, things have gotten worse. Instead of merely working for poverty wages at Wal-Mart, American workers have been lured into financing a costly education through unsecured student loans. This has rendered millions of American workers financially insolvent, dependent on corporate employers for their livelihoods.

This essay is going to analyze the state of work today as it relates to the state of work Ehrenreich experienced in the late 1990s. It will reveal that American workers are no longer merely wage slaves — they’re debt slaves. The pathway to better job opportunities — a college education — has actually left workers worse off than they realize.

Housing is still a problem 20 years later. There’s no reason to expect this will get better anytime soon.
Open up your media outlet of choice and you’re bound to find a headline like this:


While this might seem hyperbolic, it’s a reflection of what’s really happening on Main Street. Unaffordable housing continues to plague American households. Many Americans have adapted by getting creative: adult children live with their parents, strangers cohabitate, and the most adventurous convert vehicles into dwellings.

I jumped on the vanlife trend back in 2021, but even that was too expensive. I opted to live in a 2014 Subaru Outback instead of a converted Sprinter van. Only now am I starting to come to terms with the reality that my choice may have been a reflection of the state of housing — glamorized by a slew of Instagram influencers — rather than a rational desire to live in a vehicle.

While Millennials have only recently discovered vanlife, it isn’t actually new. Ehrenreich reveals it’s one of the ways hourly workers got by working low-wage jobs. While working at a restaurant in Key West, Ehrenreich observed:

“Joan, who had fooled me with her numerous and tasteful outfits…lives in a van parked behind a shopping center at night and showers in Tina’s motel room. The clothes are from thrift shops.” (26)

The working poor discovered years ago what Millennial and Gen Z professionals are only discovering now: housing is unaffordable and the only way around it is to adapt. While advocates call for more affordable housing, the reality is there’s no incentive to build it. It’s never going to come.

Real estate is finite. You can’t create more of it. In high-demand areas, real estate goes for top dollar. Investors and developers have an incentive to earn the maximum return on their investment — not to build affordable housing. This is why you see an abundance of half-vacant luxury apartment complexes and a dearth of affordable homes.

But that’s not the only problem. The real problem comes down to competition. Salaried workers without large cash reserves or padded balance sheets are now competing with the likes of Blackstone to purchase homes. According to one estimate, institutional investors on Wall Street are projected to own 40% of single-family homes by 2030.

The types of homes needed to house workers aren’t being built while the homes that are available aren’t accessible. If it feels like workers are playing a real-life game of Monopoly, that’s because they are. You can pass Go and collect $200 all day long, but if the board is already bought up, there’s nothing you can do about it.

Housing isn’t going to be solved anytime soon. In fact, it’s likely to only get more expensive.

What today’s vanlife trend reveals is that the housing crisis has now reached the professional working class. What was once relegated to the hourly poor is now something that is being embraced by educated white collar workers. The housing problem hasn’t changed, just the faces of those experiencing it.

One job wasn’t enough then and it still isn’t enough now.
Thanks to the housing problem, it’s impossible to get by working just one job. You need to work multiple jobs — or combine incomes — to get by.

This, too, hasn’t changed since Nickel and Dimed was published 20 years ago. As Ehrenreich concludes from her own experience:

“Two jobs, or at least a job and a half, would be a necessity [in Key West]. In Portland, Maine, I came close to achieving a decent fit between income and expenses, but only because I worked seven days a week. Between my two jobs, I was earning approximately $300 a week after taxes and paying $480 a month in rent.” (197)

Her research comes to an abrupt end when she is unable to find affordable housing in Minneapolis. The pay-by-the-week motels ate away at her cash reserves. She may have been able to find an apartment, but thanks to her unpredictable schedule at Wal-Mart, she was unable to secure a second job that would have been necessary to ensure she had enough to make rent.

Wages have failed to keep up with gains in productivity over the past few decades. That is well-documented and shouldn’t come as a surprise. The problem is the purchasing power of those wages has also declined. While wages have dropped, the cost of living has risen, and inflation has depreciated the value of a dollar.

Today’s workers are expected to do more with less. The math, however, doesn’t math. The solution is the same as it was when Ehrenreich conducted her research: work more.

And Americans are. According to a survey conducted by Bankrate, 39% of Americans have a side hustle and 44% of Americans believe they’ll need one indefinitely to get by.

Side hustling — much like vanlife — has been glamorized on social media. The idea of working more has been all but normalized. In the process, it’s obfuscated the very real structural problems in our economy. One job wasn’t enough back then and it still isn’t enough now. Whether you’re an hourly worker at McDonald’s or a recent college grad at Deloitte, you need more than one stream of income to get by.

This stark reality begs an interesting question about the state of work altogether: is social mobility even possible or is it just an illusion? What’s the point of going into debt to obtain a college education if the job that comes on the other side of that education still isn’t enough to get by?

Are white collar workers actually better off than those barely getting by on minimum wage or are they merely the upper echelon of the working poor?

Final takeaway.
Nickel and Dimed was written more than two decades ago. Instead of things getting better, things have gotten worse — much worse.

Throughout the book, Ehrenreich notes her own privilege as an educated career woman who’s part of the “newspaper-reading professional middle class.” Unbeknownst to her, it’s this class that has been affected the most by economic decay.

While the working poor she embedded herself with years ago are still struggling, they’ve adapted. They aren’t taking to social media to complain about their lot in life like today’s newly minted young professionals:

The working poor continue to ensure that store shelves are stocked and our stomachs are constantly full.

The social contract that we all take for granted — the belief that social mobility is possible for those who work hard — has come undone. Ehrenreich couldn’t rent an apartment on a minimum wage income, much less own a home with a white picket fence and raise 2.4 children. Now that isn’t even possible for dual-income households with advanced degrees.

Why have things gotten worse? Out-of-control housing and flat-lined wages are easy to blame. But while those are certainly problems, they aren’t the reason why things have gotten worse.

You can thank debt for that.

For the vast majority of Americans, it’s no longer feasible to cover essential living expenses through earned income alone. Whether it’s credit cards or payday loans, today’s workers get by on debt.

Student debt is, of course, the elephant in the room. The thing that was supposed to ensure upward mobility has now created a new class of debt slaves. Combined, American graduates hold $1.77 trillion in student debt.

What was believed to be an investment toward social mobility has actually indentured workers. The only way to escape is to work more. But with only so many hours in a day to render your services in the employ of another, that option, too, has reached its precipice.

Debt isn’t just something plaguing America’s college graduates. Americans now hold $1.05 trillion in credit card debt, too. Degree or no degree, millions of Americans continue to mortgage their future — at double-digit interest rates.

The brutal reality of all of this is that debt isn’t supposed to be repaid. It’s to be managed. The ability to get by is a function of one’s ability to manage limited resources and unrealistic expectations.

That’s why things have gotten worse. Our expectations are no longer aligned with the reality we face.

The book is Nickel and Dimed by Barbara Ehrenreich. It highlights how hard it was for low-wage workers to get by at the turn of the century — and how much harder it’s become for professional workers to get by today.

